Title: Antifragile
Slug: antifragile
Date: 2016-04-02 21:56:40
Tags: books
Lang: en
Summary: More wisdom here than anywhere

*For my previous post on Nassim Taleb and what he's about, see [here]({filename}../blog/nnt.md)*

It's not easy to summarize your favorite book. Capturing each idea from Antifragile as crisply and convincingly as it is done in the book is neither possible or appropriate for a blog post. So instead, I'll just explore some of the ideas from the book that I found most interesting. They are all tied together, and link back to the same central concept, but are different enough to expound upon individually.

#### The Triad

The word "Antifragile" means "something that gains from harm". It's not something we think about much. The closest word to it is "Robust", but that doesn't really capture it, as things that are robust are simply indifferent to harm. "Antifragile" is not in the dictionary. Most concepts we are familiar with are in the dictionary. However, it also turns out that ancient people living by the Medeterranean Sea had no word for "blue". Needing a rigorous definition makes things overly academic and detracts from the essence of the concept, so let's not worry about the word "Antifragile" being made up. Antifragile's opposite is fragile. Taleb thinks of these three words as three different domains that you can categorize just about everything into. Things either break under stress (fragile), they do nothing under stress (robust) or they get better under stress (antifragile). He refers to this as The Triad. It's a framework for thinking about all aspects of life.

When you apply harm (via volatility) to a porcelain coffee cup, the cup breaks. The cup is fragile to harm. If you apply that same harm to a rock, nothing is going to happen. The rock is robust. If you apply that harm to a human, provided it isn't violent enough to kill him, the human's body experiences some discomfort but also receive information and sends messages to prepare for similar amounts of harm in the future. The bones get more dense, the muscles get larger, or the reflexes get quicker. Depending on the type of harm, the body will learn from him and improve its fitness. That is antifragile. In general we see organic, bottoms up, crowdsourced, a-theoretic, natural, and ancient things belonging to the antifragile, while we see top down, scientific, academic, central, corporate, and artificial things belonging to the fragile domain. One of Nassim Taleb's concerns is that as society advances, more and more of our consumption, policies and decision making fall into the fragile column of the Triad.

We tend to naively believe that the fragile route is actually the safe route, too! One of my favorite anecdotes from this section was the thought experiment of two brothers. One worked as a midlevel manager in a bank, the other a taxi driver. The bank manager makes a predictable $500 per day, while the taxi driver sometimes makes $100, sometimes $200, and occasionally will bring home as much as $2000 per day. On average they earn about the same, but the banker's stable income makes his job seem more lucrative and enviable. However, on the worst month the taxi driver might make an average of $50 per day, but the worst month for the banker is the month where his bank is caught up in the latest financial crisis and he is completely blindsided, losing his job and possibly never recovering. The taxi driver will always have work, but never assumes he will. The banker always assumes he will have work, but ends up having none. And the outsider thinks the banker to be the better off.

If you pay attention, you realize this anecdote is all around us. We're always favoring ideas in the 3rd, fragile column of the triad over the antifragile ones.

#### Iaotrogenics and Naive Intervention

I know, more words that we've never heard of right? But iaotrogenics is actually a real world, originating from Greek, meaning "harm done by the healer". NNT writes a lot about this, and how through trying to do what's best, we often fragalize ourselves or the systems we live in. He starts with the fact that more people have been killed by hospitals than have been saved. Whether this is true is hard to discern. He argues (correctly) that every medical procedure or drug has some negative effect. If that weren't true, we would just all take that procedure. The only reason we should opt in should be if we can make large gains in health from the treatment. Any marginal gain we expect to gain is likely to be offset by the iatrogenics. Or think about public health. Some people think we can design an optimal diet. For years we were warned against eating saturated fats. Many alternative products came on the market, like margarine and products with transitional fats. We were told that these were much healthier, because they were designed by science instead of mother nature. We also were encouraged to replace our fatty foods with foods stuffed with carbohydrates and sugar. This was all supposed to be for our best interest, but now the tables have turned and turns out there is very little evidence that saturated fat consumption leads to the diseases it originally was thought to. However, as a result, we now have had to practically outlaw the "healthy", science-made transitional fat and the current battle in public health is now focused on sugar and carbohydrates.

Nassim Taleb believes that paying too much attention to the current advice from the medical journal, the nightly news, or the newspaper is bad for our health and mental state. Rather we should trust ancestral information, as it's much more antifragile. Everything with time is by definition more antifragile. Proof: since time is volatility, things that have survived throughout time are antifragile to that volatility. One of the best points he makes is against newspapers. We're taught since childhood that reading the newspaper is a mature thing we should all do to be respectable adults. It informs us to what is going on, and what we need to care about. However, did you ever notice that the newspaper is the same length just about every day (except for Sunday when they pack it with more glossy ads). Some days, very infrequent, there are events that we all need to know about and that have a bearing on our lives. But most days not much really happens in the grand scheme of things. Then why should we be expected to read the same amount of words each day? We end up mostly reading noise, and occasionally a bit of signal. To illustrate, I'll generate a random date from the last 10 years and link to the New York Time's front page that day. [Here are the top articles from that day](http://query.nytimes.com/search/sitesearch/#/*/from20060601to20060601/document_type%3A%22article%22/). The most popular article that day seems to be about a hot new company that provides you with the physical book you used to get in a CD jewel case when you bought physical music, but they offer it when you buy digital albums from iTunes. It's easy to scoff at it now. 10 years later no one cares about those books, and hardly anyone even buys digital albums let alone CDs, and that company never became the next big thing. Next time you pick up the paper and read about the latest technology company, remember this anecdote.

#### Via Negativa and the Lindy Effect

Today, when we have something wrong with us we tend to look for something to take to make it better. This is across all domains, but probably most relatable in medicine. If you have a sore back, often you'll take something to make it feel better. If you are depressed, you might take an antidepressant to feel better. Even outside medicine, if you are trying to lose weight you might take the advice from the latest diet book, or stock up on vitamin pills, strange powders, and odd tastings roots. These are all additive solutions, meaning you are looking for something to take that will cancel out whatever you feel is unwanted. There are two big problems with this. One is that these solutions usually don't work, and often have iaotrogenics. Think about the medicines or diet fads over the past 30 years. Many of them are laughable, or outlawed today. The second is that they deprive your body from stressors. We think of stressors as bad, but in the antifragile domain they are good (provided they are in small doses).

This is where the concept "via negativa" or by subtraction, comes in. If I am getting headaches constantly, maybe it's not smart for me to look at what to add to my daily routine to counteract them. Instead, I might benefit from removing things systematically from my routine, until the headaches go away. The headaches might go away naturally (the body is really good at healing itself, just give it time), or I might stumble upon, through via negativa, the fact that drinking 4 cups of coffee each morning gives me terrible headaches and when I cut that to 2 I'm fine (this is all fictitious, I don't have headaches or drink 4 cups of coffee). In the end, that will be a much healthier solution than adding an aspirin on top of my 4 cups. That aspirin doesn't get rid of the underlying effect, it just counterbalances it in an unnatural way. Removing the 2 cups though, removes the underlying effect. Plus I learn, through experimenting and tinkering, that it was the extra 2 cups that caused the headaches. I might thank my headaches later, for signaling to me that I am doing something harmful. With the aspirin I never learn what the cause is, I just mask it, and the underlying problem festers.

This is really a beautiful idea, to me. Most of what goes wrong with us, or the world around us, can be solved by removing things, not adding things. But we always are looking for an additive solution. It seems easier, and when it's backed by science and academia we get even more excited about it. Sadly, those solutions always prove dangerous to us in the long run. Look at trans-fats, statins, vioxx, blood-letting, etc.

Look into the future and imagine what your life might be like. When we do this, we tend to dream up additional things that might be part of our daily lives. Flying cars, minority-report style augmented reality, meal replacement pills, robot servants. That, though, is an additive way of looking at the future. We take a snapshot of our current lives, and add new things to it. The smarter way to predict the future is via negativa. What won't survive into the future?

If I had been asked 10 years ago to predict what my home would look like today, I probably would look at the products in my dorm room and extrapolate what they would be with 10 years of additional development. That would lead me to believe that my future house would have a nicely stocked DVD collection, a very well detailed library of MP3s sitting on my very fancy desktop computer. I'd be able to access my music, photos, books, and videos via their digital backups, which would be some sort of "digital library". Well, some of that is definitely in the right direction, but it's still very different from my world today. Most of these physical things that I imagined I'd have digital backups of have been completely replaced by their digital versions. I don't purchase new CDs, or DVDs. I don't develop physical photos, either. I don't have a digital library of books, although I constantly buy new books for my shelves (more on that later). I also would have missed most of the relevant technologies developed in those categories: mobile technologies, cloud computing, and streaming.Point being, predicting the future by extrapolating from your current reference point and imagining how the current technologies will evolve is fallacious. Instead, I should have looked at the present and imagined what technologies would go away and be replaced by entirely new ones. Had I done that, I might have instead predicted (correctly) that my discman and CD collection would suffer the same fate as the previous generation's walkmans and cassette tapes, or that my DVDs would suffer the same fate as VHS. I would have been right, too! Had I said the same thing about my book collection - that it would be replaced by an entirely new technology, I would have been mostly wrong. Of course we do have kindles today but they really haven't taken off and I certainly don't use them. So taking a via negativa approach would have been correct for *most* of my predictions, but not all. There happens to be, though, a categorical way of predicting whether a technology will remain in existence 10 years from now or fade into oblivion. Not coined, but furthered by Nassim Taleb, it's called the [Lindy Effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindy_effect).

The claim behind the Lindy Effect is that a technology that has been around for X years will, on average, be around for another X years before being replaced by something else. This is very different from traditional survival analysis, which is generally used for human or other biological life. If a human is 78 years old, an actuarial professional will predict that that person will have another 10 years to live. If that person survives another 10 years, the actuarial will predict they have another 5 years to go, and so on. As the person gets older, their additional life expectancy goes down (albeit with a negative second derivative). However, if a book is in print for 78 years, it's likely that it will be in print for another 78 years. And if that book survives the next 78 years and has been in print for 156 years, it's probably going to survive an additional 156 years (and so on). The latest business book, or book on global warming, or politics in the age of Donald Trump may seem like it's an important book to read, but the Lindy Effect tells us it's probably not going to be relevant even 1 year from now. Compare that to something like the Bible, or Stoic Philosophy or Shakespeare. It's very likely our great grandchildren will have the same exposure to those as we did.

This brings us back to the thought experiment where I sat in my dorm and predicted what would and would not stick around 10 years later. The things that disappeared - the discman, the DVD collection, the digital library on my hard drive . . . these were all fairly recent technologies. The desktop computer is a bit older, about 30 years old at that time. We still have it today, but it's probably not long for this world as portable devices are replacing it for most of its functions. Books, however, have been around in some form for over a thousand years. The printing press, which made them widely available, has been around for 600 years. Last year I [read about 20 books]({filename}../pages/rl.md), all physical, and mostly purchased that year. So the oldest technology from my dorm room, books, are still going strong and likely will continue too.

Why is this true? It goes back to antifragility, via negativa, and the Triad. All technologies receive stressors and volatility. Time is a form of volatility, since the more time passes the more opportunity there is for random shocks, black swan events, and other stressors to occur. Anything that has survived for 1000 years has done well absorbing, or improving, from stressors. Those things are not likely to be destroyed by future random shocks (until one day, they eventually will be). Compare this to a new technology. It hasn't stood the test of time, and although it seems cool it could easily be replaced or made obsolete by something on the horizon. Remember in the 90s when Microsoft was constantly fighting anti-trust battles? Because they were so valuable, and so dominant (at the time), regulators were scared that they would become an all powerful monopoly. But they had only been around for 20 years or so. According to the Lindy Effect, we should not have been worried about them at all. Even though we can't predict the future, we can be confident that *something* would come along and dethrone them. And of course, that's exactly what happened. It's silly in hindsight that we should have regulated them on the basis of monopoly power - today they're mostly engaged in a game of lame catch up with the current tech giants and a constant supply of jokes on twitter whenever they release a new product.

I'll end this essay with a quote I enjoyed from the book about the Lindy Effect and via negativa. It makes me feel good, that the future won't be an unfamiliar place of strange technologies.

> Tonight I will be meeting friends in a restaurant (tavernas have existed for at least twenty-five centuries). I will be walking there wearing shoes hardly different from those worn fifty-three hundred years ago by the mummified man discovered in a glacier in the Austrian Alps. At the restaurant, I will be using silverware, a Mesopotamian technology, which qualifies as a "killer application" given what it allows me to do to the leg of lamb, such as tear it apart while sparing my fingers from burns. I will be drinking wine, a liquid that has been in use for at least six millennia. The wine will be poured into glasses, an innovation claimed by my Lebanese compatriots to come from their Phoenician ancestors, and if you disagree about the source, we can say that glass objects have been sold as trinkets for at least twenty-nine hundred years. After the main course, I will have a somewhat younger technology, artisanal cheese, paying higher prices for those that have not changed in their preparation for several centuries.
